# AWS Applications Index

[Elastic Transcoder](#Elastic-Transcoder)

[SNS](#SNS)

* [Benefits](#Benefits)
* [SQS vs SNS](#SQS-vs-SNS)

[SQS](#SQS)

* [About SQS](#About-SQS)
* [Examples](#Examples)
* [Types of Queues](#Types-of-Queues)
* [Visibility Timeout](#Visibility-Timeout)

[SWF](#SWF)

* [About SWF](#About-SWF)
* [SQS vs SWF](#SQS-vs-SWF)

# SQS

SQS = Simple Queue Service

## About SQS

The oldest service in AWS

* SQS comes up a lot in the Solutions Architect exam.

SQS is a web service that gives you access to a message queue

* SQS is a queue system - queue can be used to store messages while waiting for a computer to process them
* Lets you store store messages independently from your EC2 instances.

SQS is a distributed queue system

* The queue is a temporary repository for messages that are awaiting processing. 
* Enables web service applications to quickly queue mesages 
  * messages are generated by one component in the application and consumed by another application component.


SQS lets you **decouple** the components of an application so they run independently.

* decouple infrastructure
* decouple microservices
* Any component of a distributed application can store messages in a fail-safe queue.
* Anytime you see the word, *decouple*, think SQS!!!

The Queue acts as a buffer.

* buffering occurs between the component producing and saving data, and the component receiving the data for processing. 
* If the producer is creating work faster than the consumer can process it
* The producer or consumer are only intermittently connected to the network

SQS is *pull-based*, versus push-based

* SQS messages must be *pulled* out of the queue by an EC2 instance.
* In contrast, SNS is push-based



### Size

Messages can be *<= 256 KB* of text in any format.

Anything above 256 KB will be stored in S3, versus SQS, up to about 2 gigs in size.

### Time-Frame

Messages can be kept in the queue from 1 minute - 14 days.

*Default* retention period: 4 days.

## Visibility Timeout

The amount of time the message is invisible in the SQS queue *after* a reader picks up that message. 

If the jobs is processed before the visibility timeout expires, the message will be *deleted* from the queue.

If the job is *not* processed before the visibility timeout expires, the message will *become visible again* and another reader will process it. 

* Could result in the same message being delivered twice.

Visibility timeout maximum: 12 hours

* If the job is not completed by 12 hours, the message will become visible in the queue again.

### Example exam question

You're getting the same message delivered twice. Why?

The visibility timeout period is not long enough. Increase the length of the timeout period to reduce duplication.


## Types of Queues

### Standard

The default type of queue.

Transactions per second: *unlimited*

Guarantee: a message is delivered *at least once*.

* Sometimes more than one copy of a message will be delivered... out of order.
  * due to the highly-distributed architecture that allows high throughput (throughput = rate of production or the rate at which something is processed)
  * Standard queues provide *best-effort ordering*, however, which means that messages are generally delivered in the same order as they are sent.

Application must be able to cope with:

* Messages delivered out of order (occasionally)
* Multiple copies of the same message delivered twice.

Great for applications that can deal with messages occasionally out of order and isn't effected by duplicates.

### FIFO

Complements the standard queue.

Choose FIFO queues when your application can't cope with messages out of sequence or duplicates.

Has *FIFO delivery*: first-in-first-out

* Order in which messages are sent / received is always the same
* Messages are in sequence

Has *exactly-once processing* 

* A message is delivered once and remains available until a consumer processes and deletes it
* Duplicates are never introduced to the queue.

Supports *message groups*

* message groups allow multiple ordered message groups within a single queue.

Transactions per second: limited to *300 transactions / second (TPS)*

* Not as fast as standard queues.

## Amazon SQS Long Polling

A way to retrieve messages from your SQS queues.

Short polling is the regular way to do it. Short polling *returns immediately*, even if the message queue being polled is empty.

Long polling *doesn't return a response until*:

* a message arrives in the message queue,
* or the long poll times out

### Example

You've got a queue that's mostly empty, and you've got EC2 instances polling the queue looking for work.

This costs you moeny, because for every poll, there's a charge.

Reduce the charges by switching to long polling. It won't return a response until a message enters the queue or until timeout of the poll occurs. 

## Examples

### Memes

* User uploads a picture
* S3 receives the picture
* Lambda function is triggered
* Lambda writes some text over the image
* Text is stored in SQS
* A fleet of EC2 instances will:
  * pull the message queue and look for work
  * put the text on the picture stored in S3 to create a meme
  * store the meme on the S3 bucket

SQS serves as a way to store messages independently so that even if an EC2 instance is lost, and can't process the message, another instance will appear and take care of the message being stored in the queue.

### Cheap Fares

Events:

* User goes to an EC2 webserver to search for deal on flights. 
* EC2 instance passes the information to an SQS queue
* Application servers (a fleet) in the background will grab the info in the queue
  * servers will then search for airline deals on various sites. 
* best deals will be collected by the EC2 instances and forwarded to the webserver
* webserver passes the information to the user

If we lose an EC2 instance, another instance will appear, so the search will go on. 

# SWF

SWF = Simple Work Flow Service

## About SWF

A way of coordinating work across distributed application components... or a way to coordinate work across multiple components of your application.

SWF is a way of coordinating both your applications as well with human beings / manual processes

Task coordination use cases:

* media processing
* web application backends
* busines process workflows
* analysis piopeslines

Tasks are invocations of various processing steps in an application, which are preformed by:

* executable code
* web service calls
* human actions
* scripts

A way of combining the digital environment with human beings.

In SWF, you've gotten a human element to factor into the design process. If there's any sort of manual process, you will be using SWF.

## SWF Actors

### Workflow Starters

An app that can initiate a workflow.

Ie, 

* an e-commere website following the placement of an order
* mobile app searching for bus times

### Deciders

This controls the flow of activity tasks in a workflow execution.

If something has finished / failed in a workflow, a Decider chooses what to do next.

### Activity Workers

These carry out the activity tasks

## SQS vs SWF

The Thing|SQS|SWF|
|-----|-----|-----|
|Timing|Retention period up to 14 days| workflow executions up to 1 year|
|API|message-oriented|*task*-oriented|
|Duplication|Need to handle duplicated messages (default type)|A task is assigned only once and is never duplicated|
|Tracking|Need to implement your own app-level tracking (esp w/multiple queues)|Keeps track of all tasks and events in an app|

# SNS

## About SNS

A web service that works with notifications from the cloud

* set up, operate, send notifications

Lets developers publish messages from an application, to send them to subscribers or applications

* highly scalable
* flexible
* cost-effective

## Send push notifications

* Directly to mobile devices
  * Apple
  * Google
  * Fire OS
  * Windows devices
  * Android devices in China with Baidu Cloud Push
* By SMS text message or email to Amazon Simple Queue Service (SQS) queues
* HTTP endpoint(s)

SNS lets you group multiple recipients using *topics*

* Allows recipients to dynamically subscribe for identical copies of the same notification.
* When you set a billing alert, that's a topic. When you set an autoscaling alert, that's a separate topic.
* One topic supports deliveries to multiple endpoint types.
  * An endpoint type could be a group of iOS, Android and SMS recipients.

Once you publish to a topic, SNS delivers nicely formatted copies of your message to each subscriber.

## Storage

All messages published to SNS are stored redundantly across multiple AZs -- prevents messages from being lost.

## Benefits

* Push-based delivery (no polling) that is instant
* Simple APIs with reasonably straightforward integration into applications
* Flexible message delivery over multiple transport protocols
* Inexpensive
  * Pay as you go model with no up-front costs
* Point and click interface on the web-based AWS Management Console

## SQS vs SNS

The Thing|SQS|SNS|
|-----|-----|-----|
|Service Type|messaging|messaging|
|Push or Pull|pull-based (polls) - instances must poll the queue|push-based - messages are pushed out to different devices.|

# Elastic Transcoder

A media transcoder in the cloud

A way to *convert media files* from their original source format into different formats that will play on smartphones, tablets, PCs, etc.

A way of transcoding video.

Has *presets for popular output formats*, meaning you don't need to guess about which settings work best on particular devices.

## Fees

Pay based on

* the minutes you transcode
* The resolution at which you transcode

## Example

* Upload your video to S3
* A lambda function is triggered
* Lambda function looks at all the metadata and sends the video over to Elastic transcoder
* Transcoder looks at the video and transcodes it to look nice on a wide variety of devices.
* Transcoder ships the transcoded videos to another S3 bucket
